The House finally get a speaker
so that it can get back to work.
Friday, Ohio
GOP Congressman Jim
Jordan was nominated to be speaker
after garnering support
from both deposed
speaker Kevin McCarthy
and from Fox anchor Sean HANNITY.
Without a leader of the GOP
has frozen
the chamber during several
looming crises from Israel's
war against Hamas
to a potential government
shutdown now just 34 days away.
It's unclear
if Jordan can win enough support
from the entire House
to get the requisite 217 votes
in a secret ballot on Friday.
He still had 55 Republicans opposed.
Joining me now is the person who started
this whole chain of events
by pushing for McCarthy's ouster,
Florida Representative Matt Gaetz.
Congressman, do you regret ousting
Kevin McCarthy
given that Israel
is now at war with Hamas
and we don't have a speaker?
Absolutely not.
The United States stands with Israel.
Israel has a right to defend itself,
and there is no need expressed
by Israel that the United States
has not been able to meet.
That's because we have an Israel
essentially on autopay
as a consequence of legislation
that was passed by Senator
Marco Rubio of Florida.
The administration is pre authorized
to meet any need
that Israel could
possibly express in this particular phase
of the crisis.
My expectation is that we will elect
speaker designate Jim Jordan
as House speaker next week
and we'll be prepared to move forward
with resolutions of support.
But those are non-binding
expressions of our opinion
when it comes to the movement
of specific material
and the coordination on intelligence.
We are authorized
because our relationship
with Israel is that unique.
How how do you think that
Jordan crosses
the finish line with True 17?
If there were 55 votes against him,
as is being reported, you were there
55 votes against him
on that second ballot last night?
Well, I think it's important
to understand how that math moved.
Initially,
there were 81 votes against Jim Jordan,
and then about 30 minutes later,
there were only 55 votes
against Jim Jordan.
So on that trajectory,
he seems to be gaining
a good amount of momentum.
Also, it's important to note
that those 55
no votes on Jordan were on a secret
anonymous ballot,
like in the basement
of the Longworth Office Building.
It's quite a different thing
to stand on the floor
of the House of Representatives
and vote against the second
most popular
living Republican in America.
I know how hard it is
to stand on the floor
and vote against the party's choice.
I did it to extract concessions
that I thought
were meaningful
that unfortunately the former speaker
did not live up to.
But my my expectation is that next week
we will elect Jim Jordan.
Frankly, Michael,
I think we
probably could have done it last night
and I would have preferred that path.
But Speaker
Emeritus McCarthy said that he wanted Jim
Jordan's family to be able to be there,
his supporters to be able to be there.
And I guess one thing
that Kevin McCarthy and I agree
on, Jim Jordan's going to be
the next speaker of the House.
You've heard the criticisms, right,
from people,
including in your own caucus.
I think one member
who said that,
that it's a group of idiots
who have led us down this path.
Others say we look Third world
ish at a time
when we need to be looking
as a model for democracies
around the globe.
How do you respond to those who say that
the whole perception of the United States
and the dysfunction of Congress
is what has arisen
out of your ouster of Kevin McCarthy?
I find it a little ridiculous, right?
Like, Oh no, the world is ending
because the House of Representatives
isn't passing
ceremonial resolutions this week.
The entire United States
Senate was out all week.
The House of Representatives
takes seven weeks off
every single year
for essentially a summer vacation.
There are days
when all we vote on are procedural votes
and post offices.
So I think that the chaos narrative
is a bit overplayed,
particularly in the Beltway,
because the lobbyists
and the special interests
want someone in the speakership
that they totally control.
They had that in Kevin McCarthy.
And just because lobbyists
and special interests
have been disempowered
by the motion to vacate
doesn't mean it was the wrong decision.
And it doesn't mean that
like we're in chaos
because there were ten days
when the lights were off
on the House floor.
We have not put our pencils down.
This last week
we were getting classified briefings
on the evolving situation
in the Middle East.
I was taking depositions of former
and current Department
of Justice officials
as pursuant to our oversight work.
So don't believe that
just because there isn't floor action
that somehow
all of our representatives
aren't working.
We, in fact,
are continuing the work of the Congress.
I heard the point that you made.
Everybody heard the point
that you made about a quote unquote,
autopay for Israel.
To the extent
there's congressional action
required of any kind vis a vis Israel,
will you be seeking to tie it
to support for Ukraine?
Well, no, I'll be seeking to to untether
any question about Ukraine
from any question on Israel.
And it's important to ask that question
because when what.
Does that mean?
Well,
I think that they deserve their own vote
and their own dignity. Right.
However you feel about Israel
and however you feel about Ukraine,
I think that a responsible
and reasonable government
ought to address
those questions separately.
They shouldn't be lashed together.
For example,
I would support
meeting additional requests
for from Israel for aid.
I would not for Ukraine.
So, you know, mushing things together,
log rolling them.
That is the old way of Washington.
That's what I'm trying to change,
whether it's our budgeting process
or our foreign aid.
I want individual votes
on separate and disparate questions.
I don't want. Okay.
But many of your colleagues,
many of your colleagues
don't share that view.
Is that your understanding?
In other words,
those who seek to diminish
United States support for Ukraine
are now looking to this Israel issue
as a means of doing so.
Unless
unless we get a reduced role for Ukraine,
we're not going to support
Israel to the extent you'd like us to.
That's a sentiment that I'm hearing.
Well,
that is not the sentiment
from the administration.
The administration is trying to combine
the question.
I am trying to separate the question.
And one of the concessions
that we did get in House
rules that will outlast Speaker
McCarthy is the ability in the Rules
Committee to be able
to raise points of order
and raise questions
to try to separate those things.
In fact,
when we had our defense
bill are $886 billion
defense bill,
Marjorie Taylor GREENE was successful
in getting a separate vote
on the 300 million for Ukraine
because of those single
subject concessions we got in January.
That 300 million for Ukraine
still passed,
but it passed
with a majority of Republicans
voting against it.
So now we have
for anyone to move legislation
to support Ukraine,
they would have to roll
a majority of the Republicans
who now believe
we should be less
involved in that conflict.
But that in no way
diminishes our support for Israel,
which is very strong but
in a bipartisan fashion.
Final quick question.
What's your answer to my poll
question today?
Should the Biden administration
encourage, quote unquote,
de-escalation in Gaza?
I knew I was getting this question.
I think the Biden administration
should be most focused
on really
putting pressure on Egypt to set up
refugee camps and passageways.
You only de-escalate
after the military operations
are concluded.
So my answer to the question
would be no today.
But I think our diplomatic efforts
should be focused
on humanitarian passageways
to get civilians out of Gaza.
If we have a pile of dead Muslim kids
that could increase
the amount of terrorism in the world,
not decrease it.
Though I understand Israel's
very sincere
and legitimate efforts
to destroy Hamas once and for all.
But Catherine,
put the social media up there.
It's probably a complaint
either about Gates or me hosting him.
So maybe he'll want to respond.
Quote, Jordan is the worst
of the bad choices for speaker.
Further proof
that the GOP cannot govern effectively
for all of America.
You'd say what to that person.
Add X.
Yeah. At x76.
I guess.
I'm glad you're
not a member
of the United States Congress
because if you were, you'd know that Jim
Jordan is a good man, a virtuous man,
someone who is broadly respected
across the Republican conference
and you know where he stands.
That's a distinction between
Jim Jordan and Kevin McCarthy.
It's one of the reasons I'm
so excited to make him House speaker.
Right.
But people like me
say, hey,
McCarthy was willing
to reach across the aisle
and keep the government functioning.
McCarthy was willing
to reach across the aisle
and raise the debt ceiling lest
we would have suffered default.
Those are those are good things.
10 seconds, you get the final word.
Well, I think that Kevin McCarthy
was ousted by Democrats and Republicans
because he made multiple
contradictory promises
that he never intended to keep.
Jim Jordan puts us back
on a path to fiscal sanity
and he gets the Republican Party
back into the fighting posture
we need to be in to win elections
and push our policy objectives.
Congressman Gates, thank
you for coming back.
Thank you, Michael.
Always good to be with you.